Dr. and General Butler, today is July 24, 1980.
This is Terry Anderson. We were talking last time
about the committee. And it was Ted Noyes. Yes.
Archie Flowers in the Department of Veterinary
Public Health was chairman of the committee. Ted
Noyes, N-O-Y-E-S. and I were the ones that studied
the compulsory ROTC and the COED matter as a
committee appointed by then President Rutter.
OK, we're going to talk about your relations with
General Rutter later. Let's get back to where we
left off. Last time, we were talking about the
Highway Information Service in the 1930s. And you
said that the corpsman, well, could you explain
how that worked? Well,
about 1936 or 1937, the highway information
stations were established at the main highway
entrances to Texas. The Civil Engineering
Department of Texas A&M
had a close connection with the Texas Highway
Department. and I don't know exactly how it came
about, but the highway information stations
first were opened just in the summertime when the
peak tourist load was experienced. They were
manned just in the summer and they were manned by
Texas A&M University cadets in uniform. That went
along for several years. I was assigned one year,
let's see, between my sophomore and junior year,
so it would have been 1937 to the highway
information station at Marshall, Texas on
highway 80 coming in from the east Louisiana side.
So I was proud at that time the uniforms were
different for the first two-year cadets and for
those that were juniors and seniors and really The
ones selected were juniors and seniors. They were
able to wear suede uniforms, whereas the first
two-year cadets wore just issue wool uniforms. So
the uniforms worn by the juniors and seniors were a
good deal dressier than the issue clothing, wool
clothing, that the first two-year cadets wore. So
after you'd completed your sophomore year, you
were eligible to buy the suede clothing, so I was
pleased to be able to wear that,
dressier shirts, herringbone twill for the
khaki, and for the wool summer, I mean winter
uniform, of course, suede. I would think that the
wool would be awesome. Well, it wasn't important.
In the summer, you see, we wore the HBT's, the
Herringbone Twill, when we manned that station.
The Corps is a whole lot better dressed now. They do
get issue uniforms and they're all the same. You
see, in our days, there was a good deal of
distinction freshman wore a white stripe around
their left sleeve down near the cuff, a fish
stripe, you know. So you didn't have any trouble
identifying a freshman. And then the sophomores
had the same sort of issue, clothing without the
stripe, and the juniors then wore the dressier
clothing but they had to purchase it see that
wasn't issued by the government in those days and
of course they were identified by
non-commissioned officer stripes and the
seniors see all had buttons that indicated rank
from first lieutenant up through cadet colonel so
there's a lot more distinction and of course the
seniors also we were all wearing the campaign hats
later came back into style for grill sergeants and
all, but we all had them then. Why did this change
and when did it? Well, the pressure of
manufacturing a lot more clothing for the Army
when they made the real sharp expansion in the late
30s and early 40s, that campaign had was an
expensive piece of clothing that wasn't really
very suitable for combat duty or hard duty in the
field, so it fell by the wayside. It really came on
early for horse-drawn artillery and for cavalry
troops, you see, and of course they eliminated the
horses. In about 1941, So there wasn't really any
very good excuse. Of course, the boots that are
still worn by our senior cadets, you see, were once
part of the official military uniform, too, with
the horses. They fell out of the official uniform
status in the early 40s, but thank goodness
they've been retained by Texas A&M senior cadets.
That's always been a senior privilege for these
boots. What about the strike for that freshman? I
don't know when that disappeared. I was surprised
when I came back and really never have really
learned how to distinguish between first and
second year cadets. Now, because their uniforms
look just alike, I'm sure that it was a part of the
elimination of the hazing and upgrading the
status of the freshman student. Because during
the middle 40s, late 30s, Texas A&M
was not all that popular, and particularly when
the public sort of, after World War II, the stature
of the serviceman decreased and ROTC wasn't as
popular. Texas A&M was doing whatever it could to
increase its attractiveness.
Very ironical, I told somebody that for the first
30 years of my association with Texas A&M, I was
continually trying to recruit students to come to
A&M. Then about four years ago, I got put on a
committee to see how we could turn it off. Texas A&M
got popular all of a sudden.
Are you trying to do that right now? Decrease the
growth?
Well,
I'd have to say yes to some degree. That is, the
policy of the university is not to encourage
out-of-state students or international
students quite as much. The differential in
Registration fees have been increased. There is
less likelihood of somebody applying on an
international basis or from out of state for there
to be waivers on any of the admission requirements
than there would be in state.
The probation status is tougher. The deans are
more likely to dismiss students that fail to make
their probation status than they were. So there
were a number of measures that were not real
drastic, but a number of measures taken to slow
down the rate of growth a little bit until we could
catch up in physical facilities where their needs
were. for faculty and for facilities to support
the student body. Let's talk about your military
career.
1942, you went with the 12th Artillery. Can you
tell me about that? Yes, 12th Field Artillery
Battalion was a 155 millimeter
General Support Battalion of the 2nd Infantry
Division stationed at Fort Sam Houston, Texas.
I was somewhat familiar with that organization
because Battery C of the 12th Field Artillery
Battalion was the one that supported our ROTC camp
at Camp Willis, Texas in 1938. The 2nd
Infantry Division was one that distinguished
itself in World War I. It had been stationed at Fort
Sam Houston, Texas
since World War I. In fact, the post was really
built for an infantry division and the Camp
Bullis, something over 20,000 acres, was a
maneuver ground and the artillery range for that
division. Over the years when the military was
somewhat de-emphasized, we'd have to say that the
2nd Infantry Division lost quite a bit of its
combat readiness. It was a kind of a parade ground
division. When was this? Well, I'd say it was a
gradual decline in combat readiness from the 20s
right up to the mid-30s.
when there was not perceived to be a major
international threat. It
was one of the old line divisions around, however,
and with the rapid expansion of the Army in the
early 40s, three different cadres were taken from
the 2nd Infantry Division to start new divisions
around. And the division, of course, as all of the
divisions, entered into a much more rigorous
training program.
And the honeymoon was over on being a part of the
military. When I first went in, in August of 41, the
military had a fairly relaxed training schedule.
Wednesday afternoon and off, no Saturday drill.
But after Pearl Harbor, of course, all that was
dropped and training became much more rigorous.
It was obvious that there would be a combat mission
for the 2nd Infantry Division. So they engaged in
tougher physical conditioning, military
training the first week. still were firing our
artillery on the range at Camp Willis.
How many men were in the division? About 15,000
men. The combat division now had been reduced
somewhat from the size of the divisions then. But
at full strength it was 15,000? About 15,000 men at
full strength. And how many people did you have in
the battalion, the 12th Artillery, how many men?
Let's see, there were five batteries,
a headquarters battery, a service battery, and
three firing batteries. I don't know exactly, but
about 600 men. How many pieces of artillery? Well
in those days, the early days, there were four
howitzers per firing battery. That was later
increased to six surgical firing batteries,
increased firepower of the artillery
battalions. It was during that time that
divisions were being mechanized and the
triangular division concept was just being put
into effect. That is- Can you explain that? Well,
yes, the triangular division concept concept was
that there would be three major fighting units
infantry regiment with all those four troops with
the concept being that the usual commitment
normal commitment would be two frontline
regiments fighting and one in reserve so that is
the way we went into world war ii and each infantry
regiment later if they They got to be called some
other things, but the concept was an infantry
regiment supported by its artillery, its
engineers, its direct support troops, plus then
some division troops. So each regiment had its
own, each battle group or regimental group had its
own artillery battalion assigned for direct
support. Then there was a medium artillery, like
the 12th Field Artillery, the direct support were
105 millimeter howitzers. The general support
was a 155 millimeter howitzer. What's the range on
these howitzers? Well, when we, when I first went
in the Army, we had the old box trail Snyder, French
designed howitzer that wouldn't fire but about
10,000 yards. But the M-1 hodgers, split trail,
came on before World War II and they would fire
about 50% increase in range, 15,000-16,000 yards
with much more accuracy and much more rapid fire
capability. They were a tremendous improvement
over the old box trail Snyder hodgers.
And the 105 Hotcher replaced what previously had
been the 75 millimeter Hotcher, which again was a
French Hotcher. And that's the one we trained on,
the 75 millimeter, as ROTC cadets. So the 105
millimeter American manufactured Hotcher just
came into the arsenal just before World War II
also. Was it a great improvement? Oh, it was a
tremendous, tremendous improvement. Not
because it had more range, but what are the other
reasons? Well, the principal reason is it had much
greater traverse without shifting the trails. So
a gun crew could make a much more rapid response to a
fire request. And it had simplified sights. The
French howitzers were very complex in their sight
adjustments. They had the French system, which
was a plateau and drum. The ROTC cadets, you had to
pick a pretty bright guy on the gun crew to handle
the gunner role, because you had to be able to savvy
that plateau and drum setting. So you had to set two
different mechanisms on the sites and the advance
was just one sighting mechanism, vastly
simplified. And then the centralized fire
direction and massing of fire techniques made
possible by these new weapons were great factors
in World War II. The Russians and even the British
never really mastered the massing of fire
techniques that we had as an artillery tactic. Why
didn't they, if we had this technology? I don't
know, it just wasn't a part of their tactics. The
Germans tended to use more isolated weapons, some
direct fire with their 88s, and these were
awesome.
But they never had the centralized fire control
where they could mass fire a lot of battalions on
one target that deserved that much attention. So
the Americans had a big artillery advantage that
way. However, the Germans were, I'd have to say,
just as good or maybe better in anti-tank fire and
direct fire kind of weapons.
Proximity fuse was another development that
really, that was a surprise. We sprung on them at
Christmas time in 1944
because the time fire or air burst were difficult
to adjust. But with the sonar based fuse on a
proximity fuse you didn't have to set those at all.
just fire and they'd burst a certain distance
above the ground because of the sonar. That was a
big advance. Though their safety factor wasn't
real good. Occasionally you'd get early bursts on
those. They weren't quite as safe as the previous
time fuses. And radar too.
That's right. So it burst, maybe they'd burst on
trees or maybe in rainstorms or other things that
would reflect sound. Really? Oh yeah, so they
weren't as generally usable and as reliable as a
regular time fuse. They've been perfected since
then. Oh yeah, quite a lot. Well let's get back to
your duties and functions in the 12th Artillery
Battalion. When you started off in April of 1942,
What was your assignment? I was a reconnaissance
officer.
That means,
you see there was a battery commander and then an
executive officer, a reconnaissance officer and
a supply officer. There were four officers in the
battery and the reconnaissance officer's duty
was to
establish contact with the supported units,
which in our cases frequently were the light
artillery battalions. We'd be assigned to
reinforce their fires. We would establish
observation posts, establish a necessary
survey, and do fire direction or fire adjustment
on observed fire missions. Well that was
Reconnaissance Officer duty. And how many men did
you have under your command? Oh gosh, it would be a
relatively small section in the reconnaissance
officer section, probably about 12 or 15.
How about field artillery school where you went
after that? What'd you learn there? Well that's
very ironical. I didn't go to artillery school
until after the war. I was here October 22nd, 1942
to the 13th of January, 43. Oh yeah, of course.
Field Artillery School. Oh that basic, that was a
basic officer's course, I did stand corrected on
that. I went to the basic artillery course,
artillery officer's course at Fort Selle,
Oklahoma and that was a refresher of the same thing
I had been given at Texas A&M.
See at that time we had the branches of service in
ROTC. After the war, as ROTC enrollment declined,
ROTC became branch general, so they didn't teach
the gunnery, the survey, the skills of the
artilleryman in ROTC. They had to get those at
service school afterward. And that's the way it is
now. Early on, you see, we had the different
branches. We had the cavalry, the engineers, the
signal, the artillery, the various branches of
service we had right in our ROTC on the campus. We
were practically as well prepared as West Point
cadet graduates to function in branches of the
service. And we were commissioned in the branches
of the service. When did you get overseas? Got
overseas in September of 43. Second Division was
sent to Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland?
Northern Ireland. That's where we went overseas.
Well, of course it's obvious that The Allies were
going to attack Fortress Europe.
The primary attack forces were assembled in
England, Great Britain, and the follow-up troops
were established as nearby there as they could.
Northern Ireland was nearby, was part of the
British Empire, of course.
So that's where we were stationed. We were there
eight months. Then we got transferred to- In other
words, you were just waiting for eight months and
training? We were training hard, yeah, for eight
months there.
And of course- What were your feelings when you
were there? Well, we knew what we were there for and
We had real excellent training. It's ironical
that some of our troops were attacked by the Irish
Republican Army then. They were then? Yeah. The
Irish Republican Army has been a factor over in
Ireland ever since Ireland was divided back years
and years ago. And of course they coveted some of
our modern weapons and all. Some of our infantry
companies had barely gotten to their village in
Northern Ireland until some little groups
attacked them to try to obtain weapons from Irish
Republican Army. And of course, Southern Ireland
was off-limits to us, so just the four counties in
Northern Ireland where our division was
stationed. In the maneuvers prior to the landing
in Normandy, The three divisions that were
identified as assault troops, I think it was the
5th Corps, went on maneuvers. And two times in a
row, one of the divisions, I believe it was the 28th
Division, didn't perform well enough. So they got
transferred out of the Corps, and the 2nd Division
was moved from Northern Ireland to England. to
Wales, actually, and given a mission of follow-up
troops on the invasion. And that happened just a
month before the invasion of Europe. So we're
talking May 1944, then. That's right. It's
amazing. The 2nd Division, being an O-line
division, had taken winter training. They were
moved from Fort Sam Houston to Camp McCoy,
Wisconsin, in November of 42.
November of 42. We took cold weather training. We
also took air landing training along the way
because aviation was getting to be a factor.
The one kind of training that we had not been given
was amphibious training, waterproofing our
vehicles and all that, but that's what we did. So it
really was a crash course in amphibious landings
and that sort of thing after we got over to England,
Wales.
And prepared yourself then for the invasion.
Prepared for the invasion, you bet. How did the,
first how did the Northern Ireland people respond
to your presence and then how did the Welsh?
Well, generally
we were fairly well accepted by people in Northern
Ireland. I know in the little town where we were,
there was some anxiety about the American
soldiers dating the Irish girls. Really?
that for a while we were under the command of
General Patton. He came over to address us at one
time. I was on duty back at the post. I really didn't
get there to his address, but of course he was a
tremendous leader, but kind of a foul mouthed old
guy. He said that He told the troops assembled
there that some of the ladies had complained that
the graveyards and all around that there were too
many cock sheaths around. And he said, you know, I
told him I'm sure glad our soldiers are using them.
He
said, it is my belief that a soldier that won't
fight
You know, this is a public speech. That's what he
was saying in the old days. Of course, we hear that
word on television around. It's
not too shocking to hear the word now, but it was a
little shocking in those days. He was a salty old
guy. So if we were taken out from under his command
and put under Bradley's command for this 5th Corps
for the invasion, but we later got back under
Patton after the St. Louis breakout and we moved
down to Brest. What were the men's feelings toward
Patton and Bradley? Do you remember? Sure.
Bradley was generally admired and respected,
but Patton was a great leader, but he had a
different style. He was a little more feared, and
he was more of a domineering type. Bradley was
considered to be kind of a soldier's general. He
had been an enlisted man himself, and was
considered as having far more empathy with
troops, whereas Patton was, his style of
leadership was different, flamboyant,
domineering driver type. So I had to say that those
were the feelings for those two generals. I'd say
they loved Bradley, but they respected Patton for
what he could do, but that they really didn't love
him. Now how had your role changed from being here
in Texas to being in Wales? Okay, along the way I had
progressed through the ranks and
in Wales I was actually on the ship going to
Northern Ireland. My first command assignment
was given to me. I was designated as communication
officer.